did you all know that when you ship an
ocean container across the world and
pretty much look around every single
thing that you see got here by ocean
container when you ship one of these
things across the world there's actually
a piece of paper that travels in
parallel and that serves as title to the
goods so there's a new owner because
you've sold the thing in international
trade and and we're actually flying
pieces of paper across the ocean still
like this in in the year 1500 when
Gutenberg invented the printing press
this was a real innovation you could
take that piece of paper and sell it in
the marketplace and that's about where
we're living that piece of paper is
called a Bill of Lading em lading is an
old English word it means loading and
that's just to give you a sense of the
industry that we work in at Flex port
we're we're making we're trying to bring
global trade into the modern world into
to your world the software world and my
own personal story I actually learned
about this piece of paper when I lost
one and we I was importing motorcycles
from China in the early 2000s in fact I
was the first dealer in the United
States with my older brother really he
was the boss I worked for him and first
dealer for a company called G Li which
is a Chinese car company they bought
Volvo a few years ago give you a sense
of how far the Chinese have come I used
to be their dealer in the United States
just selling these things on eBay and
lost one of those piece of paper
horrifying because that's the title to
the goods which means you've lost your
container and you have the there's
there's no way customs is going to
release this thing to you without the
piece of paper you you end up having to
get a new one issued it takes many many
days to create a new document to get a
chip to get it deliver to get it signed
three different parties have to sign it
the factory the importer and then the
freight forwarder it's a nightmare like
you can already hear it anxiety I feel
like coming back to me and and when this
is your only source of cash in the world
is that container full of motorcycles
you'll you know that's when you know the
true feeling of being an entrepreneur
when you can't get your stuff out of
customs and every day that it sits there
they charge you an extra thousand
dollars
so I went through that pain I went
through that pain this was back in it
must have been in 2005 and the first
time that happened to me eh
you call that a death spiral by the way
when you can't get your paper out
because you don't have enough money to
pay the defines we it took me I didn't
start flex port which is built to solve
this problem to make shipping easy for
to make global trade easy for anyone
that's our mission
I didn't start flex port officially full
time make it my job until 2013 so
there's like an 8 year gap there they
have to explain I think it's a useful
one to talk about and because during
that time I was guilty of what Paul
Graham who's the founder of Y Combinator
flex ports first investor he calls this
slept blindness is an essay called
schlepp blindness which if you haven't
read I recommend and slept blindness is
a schlep as a Yiddish word for an
arduous journey and schlep blindness is
when a problem is so big that your
conscious brain won't let you actually
entertain it you just block it you're
blind to that problem you're just like
pretend that it doesn't exist in his
essay he talks about stripe that before
stripe if you wanted to sell something
on the internet and accept credit cards
it took months and months of waiting you
had to apply with a bank to get
permission did it's called merchant
processing to sign up for it and and
what's very interesting about the stripe
example is that every single internet
entrepreneur in the world sort of by
definition experienced this pain because
we all had to take credit cards so a
hundred percent pretty much of all the
world's Internet entrepreneurs saw this
problem and we all said yeah this is a
nightmare why am I having to wait three
months for an application for permission
to be able to sell something what is
that by the way who is this bank to give
me permission to sell something and we
all went about our way and ignored the
problem in my case I just went out and
sold these crappy motorcycles on eBay
those are Honda's we didn't sell those
and I went about my way and yet here it
was this problem just staring you in the
face which we now know stripes market
cap I think I read was like
twenty two billion dollars think about
that like every 100 percent of the
world's Internet entrepreneurs saw that
problem ignored it and went about their
way selling toilets or cookbooks or
whatever it was that they were selling
and I didn't think that that's a very
valuable lesson for all of us whether
you're starting a company working a
company whatever is to let yourself get
pissed off about stuff like when there's
a problem and it's not right instead of
you know actually using that signal and
telling yourself like hmm like who's
gonna solve this problem if not me
someone has to solve it it can't just be
okay that there's this horrible problem
so Paul's favorite new example of
blindness is flex port that's sort of
anyone who ever imported a container
from another country saw that this is a
nightmare saw that it's way too much
paperwork that the freight companies are
trying to rip you off no one can tell
you where your stuff is the regulations
are really hard to understand and and
the price changes miraculously as soon
as they have your cargo in their
possession they the price goes up and so
finally eventually I came back to this
problem and 2013 made it my full-time
life's mission to make trade easier for
everyone I think trade is extremely
important in ways that are not obvious
immediately and for of course we lifted
a billion more than a billion people out
of poverty in the last 40 years through
the adoption of free-market economics
and India and China many other parts of
Asia and the world so we've seen that
trade can drive GDP it's a market that
by the way is just massive it is grown
4% annually for over 800 years which is
a nice slide to present to investors
they're not used to 800 year growth
charts but there's something even more
fundamental here is that without trade
it's actually the thing trade is the
thing that separates humans from the
animal kingdom like we serve animals
that make tools there's animal lemurs
can use 200 words I understand but there
is no animal that can trade an object
with another object because of their
difference in preferences and every time
you trade something if it's a mutually
beneficial exchange
by definition you're made better off and
so this is literally the force by which
Humanity has emerged from the animal
kingdom and so when you see that there's
this problem that's like fundamental to
the human experience that's driving huge
parts of the global economy it is the
circulatory system for the human
ecosystem and it's broken because
there's no software no technology I'm
flying pieces of paper around the world
that you know lightbulbs should really
go off that this is a huge opportunity
so as I said in 2013 I made it a really
big minute my full-time job and over the
last and and so that what I want to talk
to today is really about how do we did
this what is it we've raised now three
hundred and fifty four million dollars
in venture capital we've grown to a
thousand employees in five years we did
we closed last year I'm proud to say if
I 471 million dollars in revenue in our
fifth year in business and so why what
is it what is so different and when you
apply technology to something and it it
really is that you have an analog
process that's very broken I know if
you're in and we're all much more
familiar with Parcells because we use
them at home like you send it to your
hopefully your grandma Christmastime and
on her birthday you send her a package
that world is pretty streamlined it's
the same company from door to door it's
probably FedEx or UPS and they come to
your house the driver is a FedEx
employee he takes it in he or she takes
in a FedEx truck to a FedEx warehouse
where a FedEx customs broker puts it on
a FedEx plane and so door to door it's
one company one IT system one process in
the world of Freight and the difference
is pretty simple actually and Freight is
when something is too big and the driver
can't pick it up it's 100 kilograms in
that world there's no company that can
do it from door to door so what you
actually have to do to solve this
problem is get as many as we've got I've
seen shipments with 18 companies
involves 18 different companies from
door to door each of whom needs
a way to share data to us or to receive
data from us it connected all together
to collaborate in the old world it's a
relay race of unstructured data it
should be called we call it freight
forwarding is the name of our industry
it should be called freight email
forwarding and because it's just a human
looks at this PDF and says who else
needs to know and forwards the email and
passes on some instructions and what you
get is an industry that's extremely
inefficient where customers are get
almost no service no technology you
can't log in and see where your stuff is
which is a pretty important thing if
your whole livelihood depends on those
products arriving and so what flex ports
done is build user interfaces I think
we're pretty fortunate that as a company
that me personally I'd never been afraid
forwarder before I'd only been a
frustrated customer of freight
forwarding and that's that's a benefit
in a couple ways one I get to understand
our customer much better than a freight
forwarder does who's in it for
themselves and I'm in it for the
customer - I was naive enough to think
that this is possible and I didn't
understand all the things I just
described that there are 18 companies in
a chain depending on data flowing
seamlessly in structured ways I only
knew that the customer was getting
ripped off and had no visibility no
control and so but this is another
lesson for people is that you have to
talk in simple language if you want
employees to understand it if you want
your customers to understand it your
investors if I had white boarded every
single complexity of flex ports current
structure our data model or organization
design if I knew all that stuff when I
started and I wrote it on the whiteboard
you would think as John Nash in a
beautiful mind and nobody would invest
in that nobody would have joined me but
instead I talked in simple language I
said we're gonna make trade easy for
everyone we're gonna be TurboTax for
importing we're gonna simplify this
complex process and people that like
registered people got it and they came
and it's been a five-year mission to
untangle this web simplify the world
bring all the parties together
and and build this technology and so
that what the technology looks like is a
data suite where we each party whether
you're a trucking company a warehouse an
ocean carrier or an airline a rail
railroad an importer and exporter we're
connecting all these parties together in
one place web interfaces api's mobile
apps as well as some really old school
stuff like EDI some email a fair number
of CSV files I still see floating around
it's a it is a mess and there's not a
silver bullet but building that
technology is what lets us really stand
apart from the traditional freight
forwarders of which there are many and
5900 in the United States alone but tech
is not enough and I think that's what
we're flex board is a little bit
different than most of the companies at
this conference because this is
real-world stuff we have to have
infrastructure to connect to actual
physical bits in the world not atoms not
just bits sorry that we have to connect
to the world's planes trucks ocean
carriers container ships etc and that is
a different skill set and I am and we've
had many many technology entrepreneurs
attack this same problem I think my
ideas is not that hard for flex for the
execution is really hard and a lot of
engineering background software
developers product managers hopefully
not the product managers but a lot of
people with a technology background
don't want to go out and talk to the
customers don't want to get out there in
the real world and if you don't go in
front of the real world you won't figure
out how it actually works in many
industries we that the secretive flex
board is being able to combine the
technology with infrastructure what does
that mean it means going out to Hong
Kong and drinking whiskey until 4:00
a.m. to figure out how they heck they
load those airplanes and learning the
insides and outs and what is the problem
what is the problem that the freight
forwarder in hong kong is facing that
the trucking company in Long Beach is
facing and and treating every single
side of that platform as a customer that
it's not just people who pay us money
even our vendors or customers and we
have to understand what is it how do
they make money how do they how to
they how do we save them how do we help
them make more money by either saving
money or driving growth we in fact the
CEO o of the world it's a top two or
three ocean carrier in the world so
these are the people that own those big
container ships he told me that in 30
years as the CEO I was the first person
from the freight industry ever to ask
him how can I help you make more money
think about that like this guy had a
thousands of meetings and nobody none of
his customers have ever said to him how
can I help you make more money these
we're used to a world where it's a
zero-sum game and for him to make more
money I would have to pay more and no
one wants to ask that awkward question
but there's many other ways for your
vendors to make more money you can be
more reliable you can you can be more
predictable you can help them lower
transaction costs there's many ways and
so by looking at the world's
infrastructure of providers as and
treating them as though they were our
customers even though we're paying them
money but treating them as customers and
doing customer development the same
things that you learn about in in
entrepreneurship and going and
understand what is their need and if I
build this would you partner with me
would you give me space on your
container with on your container ship if
I could lower your cost dramatically if
I could guarantee that instead of
canceling 30% of all the containers I
booked I'm gonna cancel less than 1%
would you do business with me even
though I'm a nobody and eventually if
you have enough of those conversations
you break through and so and and so it's
technology and its infrastructure that
have made flex ports successful and even
that's not enough there's a huge amount
of expertise required its compliance
with there are 43 government agencies in
the United States alone that take an
interest and regulate imported products
43 just in the u.s. there are over we
shipped goods to 107 countries last year
and I think actually if you believe the
UN Freedom Index or whatever that thing
is called we actually have a relatively
low amount of bureaucracy in this
country remarkably and so um this real
expertise to understand the ins and outs
of these laws
these regulations to have the build
relationships with customers to be able
to solve problems for them understand
what their needs are
that's the expertise side of the
business it's not tech alone and I think
that you'll find that when when you can
combine technology infrastructure
expertise in novel ways you can generate
really differentiated and very
defensible business we in our
competition by the way is this company
called expediter so this is the world's
number one freight forward or in five
years we did it took them their first 15
years to get to our revenue number and
for sure that dotted line will come true
we this is a really interesting example
like we're used to software companies
we're almost by definition you all are
inventing something brand new that never
existed in the world if it's if it's
software and you're trying to sell
someone it convinced them they need
something that they're not currently
buying our business is a little bit
different because every single company
in the world that has a physical product
must ship it and so you're actually able
to come onto one of these companies and
if your tech is differentiating you
which it does makes you easier to use
lower transaction costs again gives you
more control you can't you can't say no
to that at some point if I can get to
the same price it's irrational not to
buy and I think one of my hypotheses is
that there are huge
pie charts of GDP the rather in the pie
chart of GDP there are these huge
sections of it that just have not yet
been fundamentally transformed by the
internet we're used to thinking
everything's been transformed everything
has already changed and I think that's
it's similar to how I used to think when
I was a kid I thought McDonald's calm
already got registered I missed my
chance to register all those domain
names and in fact like there were still
tons and tons of million dollar domain
names out there I used to be a domain ER
and the reality is I think that there
are so huge swathes of the economy that
have not been turned over by the
internet and there are big opportunities
if you're willing to do the hard thing
which is not just build tech that's
really hard trust me I know but if you
also it can
about what is the customer experience
how do I go get real deep expertise in a
domain that's super Nishi and figure out
what the world's asset owners need and
want and how can you help them and
combine these in novel ways you can
actually grow insanely fast like way
faster than a software company maybe
there's some software companies have
grown this fast but not many and I think
that's a really interesting perspective
even if you look around this room and
we're used to again thinking that the
whole world's been transformed by the
internet but actually like most of the
objects that you see are not connected
to the Internet in any way like this
stuff is just like old stuff it's not
connected to the Internet but it all
will be right like every I suspect in 20
years when you look around like every
single thing will be watching you and
you'll be watching it and it'll all be
connected so there's I there's just
these huge amounts of opportunity and
the the other big trend that we're
building towards at Flex port in
building 4 that we want how do we help
our customers really grow because this
is the other thing you don't think of
your freight forwarder as someone who's
here to help you grow they're just like
the necessary evil
you got to ship something you have to
pay someone to do it maybe we're a
little better than the other people I
call us the offensive linemen of those
in logistics were the offensive linemen
of business like you only notice us when
we screw up but actually there's a huge
amount of potential that the world has
changed fundamentally when I was a kid
and I'm not that old I'm 38 but I feel
old because I wife I did not exist when
I was in college I didn't have a cell
phone like the world has definitely
changed a lot when I was a kid there
were three television channels and you
got to pick whatever brand was for sale
on was advertising on those three
channels whoever was in the local store
or in the Sears catalog the Sears
catalog by the way is the most sad story
ever it was disbanded in 1993 the year
before the internet was invented it
could have could have been the Amazon so
Sears catalog you could set up one
distribution center in the middle of
America
and serve everybody and because three
weeks was all you could hope for but
today in terms of delivery time you
three week delivery time was fine the
cut the the brands were in charge in the
old world today customers are in charge
they can get anything they want whenever
they want it right now
two hour delivery is expected you're
gonna have two minute delivery with
drones as soon as it's ready regulated
two minute delivery you just push a
button and put them like Snickers bar
right at your seat that will happen but
how does a brand how does a company
respond to that from a supply chain
perspective it's not you can't deliver
it from a warehouse in Kentucky in two
hours and so what you're gonna see is
that brands you know if they want to
survive at an Amazon world they need to
have small pockets of inventory
everywhere little caches of inventory in
every single nook and cranny of every
zip code to be ready to deliver for
customers and this is this is what we
have to build towards is up is a world
where a company can deliver that promise
to their customer and not spend a
trillion dollars on inventory because if
the products don't tell you you're gonna
sit there with a trillion dollars in
capital on the balance sheet and so it's
all about building that infrastructure
for commerce so that you can actually
become a partner to help brands grow so
they don't get swallowed by Amazon that
is the existential threat to every
single company that makes products and
this planet right now is should your
brand exist or should it just be a
generic on Amazon and if you don't fix
it if you don't solve it if you're not
able to at least get parity to Amazon's
value proposition of to our delivery you
will go bankrupt I think there's gonna
be huge amounts of opportunity in
helping brands to make that leap to
actually survive in an Amazon world so
that they don't just get gobbled up by
the mothership if Amazon eats everybody
it seems to be happening by the way if
it happens there's a philosopher in
Germany in the 1860s who predicted this
that there would be one global mega
corporation that would take over all of
them and I think that's a pretty ugly
reality that we don't want to live in a
world
ugly world where there's one company and
we all were
for it you get whatever they decide you
deserve killed a hundred million people
last century by the way so I hope that
there's there's this room full of
entrepreneurs building software we'll
think about this world that we're in and
say there's me a huge amount of
opportunity every single product is
gonna be up for grabs in his new world
of who's gonna sell it who's gonna make
it what kind of brand is gonna do it and
is it just one big giant mega
corporation or is there a world where
thousands or millions of different
entrepreneurs can can thrive make
awesome products differentiate not just
on price and delivery time but on the
quality of their materials where they're
made how they're made and if we don't
build that infrastructure for global
commerce there's only one company who's
going to have it so I hope that's a bit
of a call to action to this community
here in the software business and say
what a huge amount of opportunity here
if we get to know these companies and
what are their problems and how do you
help them thrive and not be scared by
the fact that customers are in charge
now but actually be put in a position
where we can help those customers we can
help those brands serve those customers
and and and actually not just like
barely hang on but really differentiate
and do something unique and better than
Amazon better for their customers if we
don't it's going to be an ugly world so
that's my remarks for today and thank
you all very much for coming
[Applause]